Marien sings "le lo lai" and chicken sounds are heard.
"Bambulaé sea allá"CoroBambulaé sea alláVersosBambulaé sea allá
Bambulaé sea alláSesa para ti no másSea sea sea sea allá
Visuals of the ocean.
Saxophone; jazzimages of the ocean
"Que lo bailo la gracima" Don Rafael Cepeda Atiles
Jesus Cepeda discusses his grandfather Rafael Cepeda. He mentions that he wrote an article for El Mundo in regards to cultural preservation.
Mario Cepeda Brenes discusses the Familia Cepeda legacy, and his favorite maraca.
undefined
Jesus Cepeda states that bomba was used to plan slave revolts.
"Que toca de bomba"Son es la melodia Suenan los tambores Regalos Tata CepedaQue fuerte la bombaQue fuerte la plena Regalos Tata CepedaEsa es mi cultura CoroQue fuerte la bomba Que  fuerte la plena Regalos Tata Cepeda
Visuals display Rio Piedras where Marien's ensemble Taller Tambuye practices and performs. Marien Torres discusses joining the bomba ensemble Plenibom in college directed by Norma Salazar and being arrested for civil disobedience in 1999.
Diegetic saxophone music plays over images of La Fortaleza in Viejo San Juan. The documentary then shifts into the bomba space led by Marien Torres, where she and her class function as a single embodied archive. Together, they revisit her memory of being arrested in 1999 alongside Normal Salazar. As Marien re-enacts the moment, the dancers around her extend and amplify the memory through movement, creating a collective form of choreopolitics.In this shared practice, the group simultaneously embodies protesters and choreopolicing forces. Some dancers channel the rigidity of U.S. military presence, their arms shaped like rifles, while others move with the resistance and urgency of the Vieques demonstrators. The class becomes both the agents of suppression and the agents of defiance, revealing the tension between control and liberation through their bodies.
“Ellos han perturbado el nido de hormigas.”
Hashlye S. Pérez Vega discusses his relationship to "Yito" and his growing up surrounded by bomba.
Jesus Cepeda discusses political corruption with regard to the embezzlement of public funds. Visuals display clips of various politicians. Jesus is also pro independence and sovereignty.
Marien discusses the lack of self-governance in Puerto Rico. She also discusses how motherhood has encouraged her to fight for freedom.
Marien Torres breastfeeds her child while discussing colonization and decolonization.
Jazz music (using a saxophone and piano) plays as visuals of hurricane Maria are shown.
The speaker's music production studio and audio editing software are shown. The man sings the following song which was performed at the Encuentro de Tambores in a previous year. "Somos semillas"Somos semillas Somos las flores Somos la fruto de la bomba de nuestras ancestros.
More diegetic saxophone and piano music is played accompanying images of urban life (cars ruins of buildings Puerto Rican flags and store fronts a chicken and baby chics).
Marien Torres discusses the impact of Puerto Rico's soundscape which consisted of chicken cries that changed after hurricane Maria and also how even these animals exemplify resilience. She also discusses how the water flooded her house and her new house which is quite empty
Bayamon
Marrien Torres discusses how she had to make changes to her quality of living to continue paying for her daughter's education and to continue paying her bomba instructors.
Rio Grande
Protests discussing the wages in Puerto Rico.
In a car ride, Marien discussed civil rights, bomba, and gender issues.
All female bomba group playing at a bar in Rio Piedras.
undefined
EBPDCB is depicted. Cary Cepeda instructs classes in Viejo San Juan
Cary Cepeda discusses her family history and legacy.
Unidentified bomba song
Cary Cepeda discusses the suffering, and labor required of carrying on the legacy of bomba. They had to carry heavy drums very far to neighboring towns.
poverty theme; suffer for the culture
Generational changes. The new generation has it a little easier than the last. If they did not teach, they knew it would not continue.
sustainability and musical endangerment
Unidentified bomba song. Discussing spirituality in bomba and community formation.
8 Encuentro de Tambores
Puerto Rican Delegation in Carolina
"Yo Bailare" performed by the Delegation de LoizaCoro Yo bailareyo bailare es de la bomba
Delegation of the Diaspora. Ivelisse Dias of La Escuelita de Bombera Corazon presents a solo.
diegetic music
Diegetic saxophone music plays while Marien Torres discusses the trenches, cultural labor, and the values of resilience inherent to bomba and creating spaces for healing.
Bomba used for the 2019 protests. Clips of orotest music shown. Police whistles heard in the background.
Chickens and baby chickens appear on screen to close alluding to hope, as their presence was discussed by Marien Torres earlier in the film
"Maria Luisa"CoroMaria Luisa no te vayas
La Sanse festivals are shown along with cabezudos."El sombrero de Yare"Mi Sombrero de Yare
"Contrario mi holandé"CoroContrario mi holandéContrario mi holandéContrario mi holandé
VersosEs una cuestión de cuento(Unintelligible) que yo respecto bien
Hay cuando suenan los barriles Los barriles de mi BorinquénA la bomba yo me llama
The saxophone and piano play the same diegetic jazz tune to transition between segments while visuals of the town Mayaguez along with the ocean are shown.
Marien is seen dancing bomba in her school (Taller Tambuye). She is demonstrating both masculine and feminine bomba movements.